so I'm picking one of the Commerce ones
this week probably the best if not one
of the best Messier objects so this week
it's all about m87 this guy so this is a
super giant elliptical galaxy supergiant
which always makes me think of the Rick
James song you know it's like supergiant
supergiant supergiant okay so anyway you
can
so yeah this is one of the most massive
galaxies known in the universe it's like
the heaviest galaxies we know of the
Milky Way's mass is about 580 billion
solar masses - about 580 billion times
the mass of the Sun is contained in the
Milky Way but in m87
it's more like two thousand four hundred
billion times the mass of the Sun so
this thing is big it also has the
largest supermassive black hole at its
center as well this is the galaxy here
and this huge big blue jet thing is
being produced by the supermassive black
hole in the center it's energy that's
being radiated out from the accretion
disk around the black hole
it's going at the speed of light but
actually due to the geometry of the
system that you look at it it actually
looks like it's moving faster than the
speed of light that's something we
called superluminal motions the Jets
made of gas and particles radiation is
obviously what you see so you get a lot
of electrons in there you get stuff
called like synchrotron radiation is
giving out a lot in the radio as well so
this is a really famous radio galaxy how
beautiful is I mean it's it's false
color but it's really showing you where
the high-energy stuff is so the galaxy
now is this sort of tiny spot in the
center and it shows you you know really
how extensive those radio Jets actually
are from the black hole itself these
black holes tend to give off to jets so
they gave it off symmetrically either
side of the black hole you can imagine
it one way and the other way but the
direction that we're seeing at we don't
see this main jet on the other side we
just see the sort of the end where it's
sort of like ballooned outwards and so
it's a sort of a double lobe is what we
call them one of the very first lectures
that had as a PhD student so you know
fresh-faced PhD student that excited we
had a lecture on these radio galaxies
the professor told me and I remember
really clearly that he said if the m87
galaxy was the size of a grain of sand
then the Jets from the black hole would
extend your entire palm which I thought
was fantastic because it really reminded
me very very clearly of a famous poem by
William Blake I don't know if you know
it but it says to see your world in a
grain of sand and heaven in a wild
flower to hold infinity in the palm of
your hand and eternity in an hour and I
mean that poems beautiful by itself but
literally I hear it and it gives me
goosebumps just thinking about m87 and
the fact that you know to see your world
in a grain of sand to see an entire
galaxy in a grain of sand like I think
it's just so poetic and beautiful so the
Milky Way has like - 300 maybe globular
clusters m87 has more like 12,000 so a
huge number of God because you get an
idea of the scale you know how much
bigger this galaxy actually is it's also
in a cluster of galaxies as well so pure
remember we've talked about this before
this is the Virgo cluster of galaxies
and the reason that MHC 7 is very
special is because it's actually the
very center of this cluster of galaxies
there's probably about 1,300 galaxies in
it so it's a huge structure it might not
look like it's in the middle from this
image but trust me is the gravitational
center of this huge structure that's not
even covered by this just one image but
you'll see there's a lot of other
Messier objects in the cluster as well
it was a very productive night for
Messier when he was labeling all these
Sobecki - all the other galaxies in this
cluster all around m87 yes basically
their movements and their speeds will
all be affected by m87 so that will be
the sort of gravitational center not
necessarily going round you know in an
orbit around it necessarily it might be
more hyperbolic and stuff but there will
be movement in the cluster and it will
be driven by m87 itself so the cool
thing about m87 is that yes it's the
center of the Virgo cluster but the
Virgo cluster is also the center of
something called the Virgo supercluster
which is a cluster of clusters and one
of the groups of galaxies that in this
Virgo supercluster is the local group
and the local group consists of
Andromeda and the Milky Way so you can
think of it as you know the earth goes
around the Sun the Sun Goes Around the
Milky Way the Milky Way goes around the
center of the local group and the local
group goes around
the center of the Virgo supercluster the
center of the Virgo supercluster is the
center of the vocalist er which is M 87
so basically our entire galaxy is also
influenced by an 87 basically you know
the earth is technically going round m87
where's The Smoking Gun picture it's
it's not got anywhere near as beautiful
of structure as Andromeda you know
Andromeda is this gorgeous spiral galaxy
like our own but m87 is just a blob it's
just a giant light blob of 2400 billion
solar masses it's huge so it's not
really that interesting to look at in
terms of you know your eye and what your
eye picks out in in the shape but in
terms of you know what kinematics I eat
habit the speed that the stars are
moving out and and the speed and the
speed around the black hole that starts
moving all that kind of information that
you can glean from astronomical studies
with spectra and photometry are really
really interesting so we are think about
m87 you can ask the question is it at
the center of the cluster because it's
an elliptical galaxy and the most
massive galaxy or is it the most massive
galaxy because it's at the center to
understand that we have to go back to
the beginning and this idea that all
galaxies formed from these tiny
fluctuations all right so you think
about straight after the Big Bang you
just have the super particles and you
have all these particles of clumping
together and there's less dense parts
and there's more dense parts then you
had something that called inflation and
inflation sort of locked in all of those
density fluctuations and expanded the
universe a ridiculous rate you know
rates that we haven't seen since then
and expanded outwards so that these
density fluctuations then became the
sites for the first stars and galaxies
being formed so you can imagine any once
you have this density fluctuation you
have all this dark matter and mass and
normal matter coming in and you can end
up forming a galaxy in this rotating
disc a beautiful spiral shape like we're
familiar with like Milky Way or
Andromeda in these more dense regions
cause then you probably have formed some
other galaxies it other density
fluctuations but course that one's very
more dense so then those start to drift
in towards that more dense area and
get mergers and you start to lose that
spiral shape and all that gravitational
dance and you end up with these
ellipticals and you start forming these
groups of galaxies that are all formed
together we call this hierarchical
structure formation so it happens very
hierarchically where you can form a
galaxy then you merge galaxies and then
galaxies come together and you form
groups of galaxies because then once
you've got a group of galaxies you then
merge those together as well and when a
group of galaxies merge is the the
heaviest things will sink to the center
and again they'll merge probably forming
more blobby SH structures or rather than
beautiful Spiro structures and then
that's the heaviest thing in the center
of that what's become the cluster of
galaxies so we have a little bit of both
at the beginning the scenario was that
because it was the heaviest thing it
became the center and so it was fated to
be an elliptical because it was gonna
have mergers that ruined it spiral
structure but then by the time you
started merging groups and clusters of
galaxies together it was fated to be the
center because it was elliptical because
it was the heaviest thing in the actual
group of galaxies that before the merger
reinforced its position exactly yeah it
was like now because I am the biggest
thing I'm still gonna continue to be the
biggest thing and so you have a little
bit of both happening and that wasn't
always well understood for a long time
it was only by studying there sort of
the kinematics how the Stars moving
these galaxies that we really figured
that out so like by luck it was chosen
to be a leader but then it started
showing leadership qualities exactly
yeah exactly
where does this rank on the list of
places in the universe you go if you
could go on a fantasy tour trip Dean of
it I definitely go to the Eagle Nebula
cause it's my favorite I'd probably go
visit Andromeda I'd probably go see the
Whirlpool Galaxy in 87 obviously because
it's the center of you know our local
universe if you will maybe go see the
Horsehead Nebula that's pretty cool
so if you think about m87 the most
massive galaxies we now know must have
actually formed from one of the most
like biggest of the density fluctuations
these tiny density fluctuations that
were imprinted in by inflation
one of the most massive ones must have
been where m87 is now I think m87 most
embodies the phrase started from the
bottom now we're here because it started
from something so tiny and it's now
become the most massive so both William
Blake and Drake in this video you don't
know Drake
the straight the rap offices okay
started from the bottom now we're here
famously Cathie's I've turned into my
dad do you know do I keep you young no
well their quest to make videos about
all 110 Messier objects also started at
the bottom and well now we're here if
you'd like to watch some of the other
videos check out the links on the screen
and in the video description you can
also support us on patreon which is
something we really appreciate if you're
so inclined so check out those links as
well it's like super giant super giant
[Music]